Title:   Wanted: Gift, Got: Gift
Package: Test::BinaryData

=head1 The Case of the Invisible Differences

I've seen this kind of output from test programs more than I'd like to
remember:

  #!code
  not ok 6172 - sent expected message
  #   Failed test 'sent expected message'
  #   at t/omnibus.t line 1938.
  #          got: 'Foo.
  # '
  #     expected: 'Foo.
  # '

You'll stare at that for a long time* before having the clever idea of piping
the test through C<cat -A> -- only to find that you're only expecting a
carriage return and newline, but you're getting a newline.  After the hundredth
time, you learn to bring C<cat -A> into play as soon as you see this kind of
weird test result, and lesson helps.  The problem is that it I<doesn't> help
when diagnosing CPAN Testers reports from your code running on SqueeOS True56,
a platform that you've never heard of and that nobody knows the line endings
for.  What's going on with the output?  You can't say, so you contact the
smoker and ask him to re-run the tests and tell you what the bytes in question
are, but it's a pretty lousy approach.  The solution is to fix the diagnostic
messages to show you everything that might be relevant.

L<Test::BinaryData> replaces the usual "have X, want Y" diagnostic with output
inspired by C<xxd>.  The above test would have produced:

  #!code
  not ok 6172 - sent expected message
  #   Failed test at t/omnibus.t line 1938.
  # have (hex)               have           want (hex)               want        
  # 466f6f2e0d0a------------ Foo...       ! 466f6f2e0a-------------- Foo..       

It's pretty obvious, here, what happened.  There's an extra byte in the "have,"
and a quick glance at the compared lines shows that the bogus byte is an
C<0x0d> before the shared C<0x0a>.

If we've got a bunch of identical content before the difference, we get leading
content for context:

  #!code
  # have (hex)               have           want (hex)               want        
  # 310d0a320d0a330d0a340d0a 1..2..3..4.. = 310d0a320d0a330d0a340d0a 1..2..3..4..
  # 350d0a360d0a540d0a380d0a 5..6..T..8.. ! 350d0a360d0a370d0a380d0a 5..6..7..8..
  # 390d0a31300d0a31310d0a31 9..10..11..1 = 390d0a31300d0a31310d0a31 9..10..11..1
  # 320d0a31330d0a31340d0a31 2..13..14..1 = 320d0a31330d0a31340d0a31 2..13..14..1
  # 350d0a31360d0a31370d0a31 5..16..17..1 = 350d0a31360d0a31370d0a31 5..16..17..1
  # 380d0a31390d0a32300d0a32 8..19..20..2 ! 380d0a31390d0a32300a3231 8..19..20.21
  # 31---------------------- 1            ! ------------------------             

The column between the have and want signs shows you the relationship of the
two subsequences: either they are equal (=) or they are not (!).

=head1 Comparing Encoded Text

Originally, I wrote this module exclusively for comparing line endings.  It had
obvious applications for testing the results of encoding text strings, but I
didn't know much about encoding at the time.  Once I became further mired in
encoding issues, though, I came back to Test::BinaryData and found it really
useful.  For example, why did performing the same operation from different
operating systems fail, with no visible differences?

  #!code
  # have (hex)               have           want (hex)               want        
  # 517565656e7372c3bf636865 Queensr..che ! 517565656e737279cc886368 Queensry..ch
  # ------------------------              ! 65---------------------- e          

Both encode the name of Queensrÿche, complete with L<heavy metal
umlaut|http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heavy metal umlaut>, but the byte sequences
differ.  The first is LATIN SMALL LETTER Y WITH DIAERESIS, but the second is a
combining sequence: LATIN SMALL LETTER Y, followed by COMBINING DIAERESIS.

These forms are identical when read, but of course computers will see them
differently, and this can cause really bizarre, awful bugs.  As a side
note, this kind of bug led me to find L<Unicode::Normalize>, which is something
any programmer dealing with "funny characters" should know about.

Test::BinaryData is meant to compare byte strings, and will reject any
comparison when either side of it contains "wide characters" -- a sign that the
content is probably a non-encoded character string.  And anyway, cramming a
four-character "byte" into the diagnostic display wouldn't work!

=head1 See Also

=for :list
* L<Test::BinaryData>
* L<perlunitut> and L<Unicode::Normalize> - for learning to do Unicode right
* L<Test::Differences> and L<Test::Diff> - more "like C<is> but better" asserts
